
# Background and Summary of Key Work and Reference

The following literature review provides a comprehensive overview of using Energy Storage Systems (ESS) to lower energy costs. Using batteries in this manner is still novel, with a broad range of ESSs and use strategies available for evaluation, where their use in different situations can produce dramatically different results. By having a comprehensive understanding, the scenario, the best strategies and energy storage technologies for the new university campus are determined. This section is broken down into the following:

* \ref{how-reducing-the-universitys-energy-bill-increases-sustainability} - How Reducing the University's Energy Bill Increases Sustainability
* \ref{university-energy-charges} - Background into the University of Bristol's current energy billing structure
* \ref{current-peak-demand-management-methods-and-energy-storage-systems-usage} - An understanding of the current methods of reducing energy bills through peak demand management and evaluation of the university's current methods
*  \ref{peak-shaving-systems-literature-review} - An overview of research conducted into using energy storage system to reduce bills; including a variety of different case studies and analysis on ESSs financial return on investment (ROI). This research will highlight specific areas to be investigated in section \ref{battery-storage-technology-key-advantages-and-challenges}how
* \ref{peak-shaving-technologies---electrical-storage-system-ess} -  Analysis of the applicability of different ESSs, down-selecting the most viable candidate for modelling

## How Reducing the University's Energy Bill Increases Sustainability

The UK's energy grid uses many methods of generating the power to meet demand. This energy comes from both clean (hydro, wind solar e.t.c.) and dirty energy (coal, gas e.t.c.). Due to the nature of most clean technologies, these sources are used to meet the UK's base load (power usage during off-peak periods) \cite{GBNation22:online}. When there are periods of the day when energy usage is higher, (peak- demand) additional fast-acting dirty sources like combined cycle gas turbines are used to meet this demand \cite{Reducing94:online}. These periods of a high spike in demand are charged much more significantly, for this reason, highlighted in \cite{7555793}. ESS proposes a new way of levelling out load on the grid, reducing the need for fast, responsive dirty technologies to be used. The reduction in emissions for the university by using energy storage technologies to reduce peak demand can reduce between 250 - 360gCO2/kWh \cite{Part1Att26:online}, while having the potential to save the University a significant amount of money.

## University Energy Charges
The University of Bristol's infrastructure spans across three sites; the City Centre, Stoke Bishop and Langford. Across these locations, the majority of facilities receive separate energy bills, allowing a high degree of granularity in the understanding energy charges \cite{Jbrentmeet}. The University receives charges bundled together under four distinct themes \cite{Jbrentmeet}, described below discussing how using batteries could reduce this cost.

\begin{enumerate}
\item \textbf{Distribution Use of System (DUoS)} - This section of the bill includes the capacity charge and unit charges.
\begin{enumerate}
\item \textbf{Unit Charge} - Unit charges come at three different rates, green, amber and red \footcite[See page 27 of][]{SWEB201492:online}, depending on the time of day. Energy costs during red periods are significantly higher (between 5pm-7pm). For Western Power (University's current supplier), there is a 17000\% increase in price during these periods \footcite[25.405 p/kWh in red periods against 0.147p/kWh in green periods][]{SWEB201492:online}. Reducing unit charge will be the main method of reducing peak demand charges, where an ESS should be used during Red rate periods and charge in only green periods. Unit Charges make up 22\% of the bill  (see Figure \ref{Development-38}).
\item \textbf{Capacity Charge} - this is where the customer pays for a maximum demand level in kW \cite{Deconstr52:online}. The capacity charge is set higher than the actual maximum demand, reducing the risk of breaching this threshold. If breached, the customer incurs substantial penalties, and the supplier increases the threshold for the next billing period. By levelling off peaks in energy demand, the capacity charge threshold can decrease. Capacity charges make up a 4\% of the monthly bill  (see Figure \ref{Development-38}) where the risk surpassing the threshold exceeds any savings seen through implementing an ESS.
\end{enumerate}
\item \textbf{Transmission Network Use of System (TNUoS)} - These come from three half-hour periods when the UK's National Grid demand is greatest, referred to as TRIADs. These dates lie between November and February and must be separated by at least ten days during the financial year \cite{TriadsWh7:online}. The average max peak demand across the three Triads \cite{TNUoSTra99:online}, is multiplied by a tariff for the respective zone in cost per kW \cite{TNUoScha93:online}. Combined they become the TNUoS charge, added to the customer's end of year bill. The University has become quite good at forecasting these periods \cite{Jbrentmeet}, making it possible to schedule ESSs to reduce peaks during these periods. To effectively mitigate this charge, an ESS must be able to provide substantial power demand (kW). TRIADS currently encapsulate 7\% of the monthly bill ( see Figure \ref{Development-38}).
\item \textbf{Feed-In Tariff (FIT)} - Based on feeding back energy to the grid. Dependent on the battery system selected, there is potential to increases the value of the ESS by leveraging this charge. This charge is highly complex and frequently changing so will not be evaluated in this project.
\end{enumerate}

## Current Peak Demand Management Methods and Energy Storage Systems Usage

The term "peak demand reduction" is synonymous with peak shaving; the ability to control energy usage during intervals of high demand, to limit or reduce demand charges \cite{schneiderRECPS}, \cite{baldorPS}. Traditionally there are two methods for reducing peak demand for industrial complexes \cite{schneiderRECPS}. These are:

* **Load Shedding**: This is reducing energy usage, by switching off certain systems during periods of peak demand \cite{6199851}. An intelligent scheduling system or a simple forecasting tool can be used to execute load shedding \cite{Reducing37:online}, where systems are switched off autonomously or manually. Often load shedding is calculated daily using a schedule to set a fixed maximum energy limit  \cite{6938948}.Load shedding predictions methods will be useful in defining the strategy that the energy storage system will use.
    * *Limitations*: Forecasting errors can significantly reduce the effectiveness of this system, where reactive methods are often better \cite{6938948}. Getting university staff and students to change their usage habits, to shift load in peak times appears unfeasible and potentially more costly \cite{Jbrentmeet}. Experiments conducted by the University of Copenhagen have further supported this opinion \cite{copenmeet}.
* **On-site Generation**: Adding off-the-grid capacity to the consumer \cite{schneiderRECPS}. The University currently uses some generator to reduce TRIAD charges. Generators are run roughly ten times a year during periods when the UK's energy load is greatest. \cite{shen2016} shows research supporting the financial feasibility of running diesel generators during these times. Due to the environmental impact of using diesel generators, an ESS would act as an improved replacement for this method for reducing TRIAD charges.
    * *Limitations*: The University currently has 0.5MW of PhotoVoltaic (PV) installed using nearly all available space \cite{Jbrentmeet}. These PV's provide only 0.5\% of the total energy demand, meaning the use of on-site generation to offset peak demand has a negligible effect in flattening the University's demand. Pairing batteries with PV as a method of supply levelling appears unfeasible in the context of the University.

In addition to these limitations, statistics such as "40% of energy consumption in the campus comes from 5% of the space, predominantly labs” \cite{brentemail}, make the University campus a unique case study for peak demand saving, where energy storage systems appear more attractive than traditional techniques.

IODICUS, is a current University project, looking at reducing energy costs, by improving the amount of sensing data around the university's usage. This project produced middleware for an IoT deployment of energy sensors/actuators, and software to explore the resulting ‘big data’ of the sensors \cite{priestemail}.  Although the project did not evaluate using ESSs, the outcome of improving sensing data will help to improve the chosen ESS performance.

There are a limited number of commercially available solutions that use ESSs to reduce peak loads directly. ABB offers energy-storage, smart-grid, products which perform load levelling at grid level \cite{abbpeakshave}. These systems are designed primarily for supply levelling, using forecasting methods and extensive ESSs to offset excess energy supply produced from renewable energies \cite{5559470}, rather than focusing on reducing its customer's energy bills. One Cycle Control have created technologies to regulate peak-load and mitigate peak demand charges for commercial/industrial facilities using Li-ion batteries \cite{peakload38:online}. The technologies proved effective at reducing peak demand charges, but highlight that the steep cost of the ESSs reduces the system's financial feasibility \cite{Demonstr51:online}. Being able to sense peak loads and respond actively will maximise the performance of the system, while the ESS chosen will have the greatest effect on the systems cost. Section \ref{peak-shaving-technologies---electrical-storage-system-ess} evaluates these two different technologies. Based on there being no direct commercial solution this report sets to understand the components required to create an effective energy storage solution for reducing the university's new campus energy bills.

##  Peak Shaving Systems Literature Review
Acknowledging limitations in commercial peak-shaving ESSs, it is crucial to understand current research in using ESS technology to design an efficient system architecture. Research is grouped, highlighting each section's significance and relevance to the development of the modelling the energy storage system.

### Forecasting and the Use of ESS in Load Shifting
Using energy price forecasts, an ESS can be switched on to shift energy costs; purchasing energy at a cheaper rate, using this energy during peak times. Due to the gap in energy prices, demand charges and investment costs for an ESS, NaS, Li-ion and Flow batteries, a basic on/off algorithm to shift energy purchasing from peak to off-peak times has not been proven to meet a viable return on investment (ROI) \cite{7555795}. This Italian case study had very different pricing schemes to the university, meaning further investigation may find that this technique is feasible. \cite{5590194} used real hourly spot prices to decide the best times to turn on and off Vanadium Redox Batteries (VRB) and Polysulfide Bromide Batteries (PSB). Through sequential quadratic programming (SQP), battery sizes were optimised, finding PSB's had a better business case for load shifting. The fundamental differences between \cite{7555795} and \cite{5590194}, were the energy saving strategy and granularity of the pricing data used. \cite{6938948} evaluated different control strategies combining many forecasts to reduce errors in peak shaving over a monthly period. Weighted and lowest error forecasts were the best strategies for an energy management system and should be added to the system strategy if forecasting is used. \cite{Bennett2015122} added a real-time operator to create an intelligent scheduling system for home prediction. This system significantly improved the state of charge of the battery, freeing more energy for use in reducing peaks, highlighting that forecasts combined with real-time information can increase the performance of the system further.  Modelling development will research:

* the implications of battery health on the lifetime value of the battery, for the battery selected
*  understand if the University's energy usage data is responsive enough for a real-time intelligent scheduling system

### Supply Levelling
Supply levelling is the most common use for ESS \cite{iearoadmapes}, using large batteries to reduce power fluctuations brought by the use of renewable technologies \cite{7324861}, \cite{7564619}. Supply levelling works by storing excess supply, reducing peaks in the grid rather than in demand. The technology is, therefore, similar to peak demand shaving. \cite{Allik20161116} looked at improving supply for a residential home. Shiftable water heating was identified to account for 50% of household electricity use, so was used as the primary storage device. Excess load from wind turbines was used to heat water in excess supply periods bypassing an inverter improved energy losses. \cite{Leadbetter2012685} supports this research. Minimising conversion through inverters makes a large difference in the efficiency of the system. Modelling development will therefore investigate:

* the effect energy conversion on the ESS performance
* using heat as a secondary storage method

### Battery Sizing and Financial Modelling
There are numerous studies, analysing the business cases for ESSs. \cite{7555795} and \cite{7555793} model the use ESSs broadly, to reduce the cost of all energy charges, revealing that the ROI is unlikely to be feasible beyond 2020. Papers including \cite{1300158} and \cite{6175723} evaluated financial models for particular case studies, showing that bespoke solutions achieved greater peak shaving reductions than returns promised by current generic products \cite{abbpeakshave}. \cite{7555795}, \cite{7555793}, \cite{1300158}, \cite{6175723} and \cite{20164002874437} all present a strong arguments that a bespoke solution for the University will provide a better business case for ESS than generic commercial technology.

Investigating the benefits of a decentralised system, reducing peaks on a small scale rather than using one large central ESS,  \cite{6604477} analysed both peak shaving and battery longevity for a large data centre.  Through both experimentation and modelling,  \cite{6604477} showed that when regarding the batteries lifespan, the ability to regulate load through a series of batteries can be more favourable than a centralised system. Research conducted by \cite{6348200} and \cite{Demonstr51:online} also both support using a decentralised system. A simulation of the impact of lithium-ion batteries operated under a peak-shaving control algorithm identified cost-optimal battery configurations and their impact on grid demand, revealing that small short duration batteries were more favourable and cost effective for the customer, further supported by \cite{20164002874437}.

\cite{20160601898032}, \cite{Levron201280} all \cite{5371839} all show alternate ways of optimising the battery sizing configurations. \cite{5371839}, used a non-numeric modelling method, focusing on ultra-capacitors to find the optimal ESS. The results emphasised the constraint of storage capacity, showing an exponential decrease in value gained after a particular size of ESS. Finding the required battery size and power for different University scenarios will be the primary focus of this project's model.  \cite{Levron201280} created an analytical model, using energy bands to regulate peak load, giving an optimum storage size for a given system;  this was a straightforward and efficient method of modelling battery usage. \cite{20160601898032} looked specifically at Vanadium Redox Flow Batteries (VRFB) arguing benefits over other ESS methods, producing a MATLAB/Simulink for a residential use case, showing that VRFB can regulate its frequency efficiently, due to its fast response time, while still performing peak-shaving services. This project proposes using a similar modelling technique to \cite{20160601898032}, incorporating more ESSs. This research highlights:

* modelling techniques to consider when developing the optimal configuration of the battery to purchase
* that the model should assess the effect of labs on the energy profile of the building, to see if there is a business case for purchasing multiple batteries than just one


## Peak Shaving Technologies - Electrical Storage System (ESS)

The selected Electrical Storage System (ESS) will govern the cost and feasibility of a peak shaving system. An ESS converts electrical energy into a form stored for later use \cite{Chen2009291}.  Electrochemical batteries characterise low maintenance, high round-trip efficiency, long cycle lives and high energy density's; arguably being the most appropriate technology for peak shaving \cite{liao2016a}, \cite{Dunn928}. Batteries, therefore, have been chosen as the main focus for this study. The various storage methods can be characterised for different uses summaries below:

* **Energy Management:** for large scale storage, typically used by power plants for load levelling and ramping/load following.
    * Pumped Hydroelectric Storage (PHS), Compressed Air Energy Storage (CAES) and Cryogenic Energy Storage (CES) are the conventional technologies for high generation above 100MW. All these methods are on a scale too large to be considered for this project.
    * Large-scale batteries, flow batteries, fuel cells, solar fuels, CES and Thermal Energy Storage (TES) are suitable for medium-scale energy management with capacities of 10 – 100 MW. These are appropriate for consideration for this project.
* **Power quality:** fast response times improve power quality allowing techniques such as the instantaneous voltage drop, flicker mitigation and short duration uninterrupted power supply
    * Flywheels, Batteries, Superconducting Magnetic Energy Storages (SMES), capacitors and ultracapacitors have millisecond response time lower for storage sizes less than 1 MW - suitable perhaps in addition to large scale battery. Flywheel efficiency is too low for operational use, so has been removed from this study.
* **Bridging power:** Relatively fast response (< 1 s) but also have relatively long discharge time (hours). The typical power rating for these types of applications is about 100 kW – 10 MW.
    * Batteries, flow batteries \cite{flowbatstan}, fuel cells and Metal-Air Cells\cite{Chen2009291}, \cite{batuni}.

By removing energy storage methods that would not be appropriate for the system a table was created \footnote{See table \ref{battabs}, in the Appendices} comparing ESSs. Batteries along with capacitors provide the response time \cite{Choudar201521} and efficiencies required to make the system justifiable, where only rechargeable batteries were compared.

## Battery Selection - Tesla Power-pack 2

Due to the maturity of the technology, the fast frequency response in delivering power, Li-ion batteries were selected as the most viable option for achieving the project's aims.  Due readiness in information around performance and price, the Tesla Powerpack 2 was chosen for this model; where competitors EOS and BYD lacked information about their pricing structures making it difficult to validate any results the model would produce. The model will use Teslas current costs but will evaluate the effect of competition and improvements in  Li-ion performance in driving costs down further.
